---
title: Wasn’t This a Treeless Prairie?
author: S. Roy Kaufman
type: post
date: 2013-11-20T02:27:37+00:00
categories:
  - Rural Reconnaissance
attribution: The following article was featured in the the [Freeman Courier](http://freemansd.com) in November 2013, as part of the feature "Rural Reconnaissance".
---

So why should it be troubling to see more and more shelter belts and fence lines
and pioneer wood groves being bulldozed and burned and buried? Or hasn’t anyone
else noticed the disappearance of landmarks that have graced our landscape for
some 100 years now? Even those of us native to this place find ourselves lost on
familiar country roads when we come to intersections that used to mark a farm or
a grove of trees, as my brother who now lives in Michigan and I discovered when
we were out for a drive a few weeks ago.

It’s hard to believe that nearly all the trees that grace our landscape were
planted since pioneers from Europe settled this land in the 1870s. Many groves
were planted as part of the terms for claiming a homestead on this land, and
they sheltered the homes and farmsteads established by these settlers. While my
parents banked the furnace with coal for the cold winter nights, most of the
fuel used to heat their home through the 1930s through the 1960s came from the
grove of trees behind our house. One of the tasks each fall was to drag out the
dead trees and branches from the grove and cut them up with a bucksaw for the
winter’s fuel.

Of course, I understand the dilemma of farmers who have to work around shelter
belts and fence lines and groves of trees. With today’s modern equipment, how
much more easier and more pleasant it is to work straight across an 80 or a
quarter section (or more) without having to work around the trees. Plus, the
trees sap moisture from the crops planted near them, reducing the yield in those
fields. Still, I confess that it seems somehow shortsighted to me to bulldoze
the trees for the sake of convenience and profit, in order to raise a few more
bushels of corn for a few short years until this ethanol balloon bursts.

Can we even begin to understand what we are losing with every tree destroyed?
Few use them for fuel any longer, as my parents did. But, oh my, what those
trees represent in terms of erosion and climate control! What those trees
represent for wildlife habitat! It’s incalculable! Unless we are climate change
deniers, we worry about global warming that happens because of carbon emissions
into the atmosphere. But the trees through photosynthesis absorb some of that
carbon dioxide and give off life-giving oxygen in exchange. And when the winds
blow across the prairies, as they do, the trees buffer the wind and prevent
erosion. Perhaps no one cares any longer for all the diverse animals and birds
that share our landscape, or the wild berries and chokecherries and plums that
grew along the fence lines, but everyone’s lives are impoverished when all this
diverse life is driven out and replaced by monoculture fields.

It is not a new story. Even in this land, the farmers of the 1920s neglected a
diverse landscape only to be enveloped by the dust storms and droughts of the
1930s. Many of the shelterbelts we see in the Midwest were planted in response
to that catastrophe. There are, to be sure, incredible financial pressures
driving the current uprooting of the trees, given the price land is selling for
these days. Still, I have to wonder how long this fragile, life-giving earth
will be able to withstand the devastation we are bringing to bear upon it.
