---
title: Community Rooted in Agriculture
author: S. Roy Kaufman
type: post
date: 2013-03-05T00:40:25+00:00
url: /2013/03/community-rooted-in-agriculture-2/
categories:
  - Rural Reconnaissance

---
My part-time work at Heritage Hall Museum reminds me at every turn of the
history of this rural community, and its agricultural roots. The larger Freeman
community was established mostly by Germans from Russia, who arrived here in the
1870s, now 140 years ago. They were an agrarian people, with a long history of
living on the land, coming here as faith communities of Lutheran, Reformed,
Catholic and Mennonite faith.

Southeast South Dakota was virgin prairie when these pioneers arrived here, only
recently opened for white settlement after the 1858 treaty of the Yankton Sioux
with the United States. There was no infrastructure—no roads or towns or
commercial settlements. The railroad was not built until 1879 leading to the
incorporation of Freeman in 1893. Life was incredibly harsh and hard in those
early years. In his memoir of Mennonite immigration to the Great Plains, Emil
Waltner in Banished for Faith recalls the blizzard of 1888 (recently highlighted
in the January 9 Courier), an 1889 prairie fire, the 1878 West Vermillion flood
in which nearly the whole Jacob Gering family perished, and the grasshopper
plague of 1875 that decimated the first crop the pioneers had planted (pp.
196-202).

The early pioneers preferred land near a creek or river, with easy access to
water. My own great-grandfather, Christian Kaufman, claimed a homestead on
Turkey Ridge Creek a mile east of the “church road.” But the West Vermillion
flood demonstrated the dangers as well as the opportunities of settling near the
streams of southeast South Dakota. It was often only through bitter and painful
experience that these pioneers learned to cope with what was then a harsh and
erratic climate. But these pioneers were resilient and resourceful people, as
the eventual establishment of the Freeman community attests.

Undoubtedly, it was the agrarian heritage of the pioneers that enabled them to
establish a community in this place. These people knew how to make do. They knew
or were willing to learn what was required for them to become self-sufficient in
living on the land they had homesteaded. In the end, the community they
established was largely self-sustaining. They gave more than they took from the
land, while also trading for the things not readily available to them in this
climate and geographical setting.

At the same time, the local ecology also dictated the formation of the
community. The agriculture they established in this unique natural setting
shaped the culture of their community. Agriculture describes the practices,
arts, and sciences involved in cultivating the soil, producing crops and raising
livestock, and preparing and marketing these products. In its root, agriculture
literally means “cultivation of the field.” Culture, meanwhile, describes the
“customary beliefs, social forms, and material traits” of a particular group or
community. In the case of the Freeman community, the culture of the community
was shaped by its agriculture.

The question I have is how agriculture still shapes the culture of this
community. My own bias is that the life of a rural community depends on the
vitality of its particular agriculture. A healthy agriculture rooted in the
possibilities and limitations of a particular place will produce a healthy
community. How do our current agricultural practices inform and shape the
cultural life of our community?


