---
title: Intimacy with the Land
author: S. Roy Kaufman
type: post
date: 2013-03-05T00:12:00+00:00
url: /2013/03/intimacy-with-the-land/
categories:
  - Rural Reconnaissance

---
One of the beauties of farming as a way of life is the intimacy that it affords
farmers with land and the natural community of life among which we humans live.
Writing in the Iowa State University newsletter of the Leopold Center for
Sustainable Agriculture, Fred Kirschenmann writes, “Every farmer ultimately
knows that good management requires intimacy. Like all living organisms, farms
constantly change and therefore close involvement with the plants, animals and
soils of the farm is essential to skillful farming.” (_Leopold Letter_, Summer,
2012, p. 5)

This intimacy has been reduced by the pressures of industrial agriculture to
specialize and achieve economies of scale. Farmers, like the rest of us, have
been encouraged by Enlightenment philosophy to see a disconnect between
themselves and the rest of the natural community of life among which we live. We
are led to believe that we can “master” nature. We claim to own the land to use
as we please, instead of seeing ourselves as a part of natural systems and
dependents of the land.

But even so, most farmers I know pay close attention to their land. They learn
to know how the land lies, what creatures and plants are most likely to thrive
on each part of their land. They observe how the land absorbs and holds the
moisture, where it is likely to erode, and how best to conserve the soil.
Undoubtedly there are moments, perhaps daily, when farmers pause in awe at the
mystery and grandeur of life in which they are privileged to play a part as
tillers of the soil and keepers of the plants and animals we have shaped to form
our agriculture.

This intimacy with the earth which sustains our lives by God’s providence and
grace is something that is also sought and claimed increasingly by people in
every walk of life, including urban dwellers. It explains the explosion of urban
gardening we witness in decaying cities like Detroit. It is in no small measure
the reason for the popularity of the local food and community supported
agriculture (CSA) movement which links rural food producers with urban
consumers. Often these CSA’s will encourage and invite urban consumers to visit
the farm and assist in caring for the crops and livestock. There is deep within
us, alienated as we are from nature, a longing to be more connected with the
deepest sources upon which our lives depend.

Some years ago Wes Jackson, founder of The Land Institute in Salina, Kan., wrote
the provocatively titled book, Becoming Native _to This Place_. The title
suggests that the heart of the agricultural task is learning how to fit in and
belong to the place we find ourselves. Another provocative book title in my
library is _Learning to Listen to the Land_, a collection of articles about
sustainable ways of living here on planet Earth. And still another book I have
is titled _Meeting the Expectations of the Land_, suggesting that it is the
land, and not we humans, that calls the shots. As Fred Kirschenmann says at the
end of his column, “Being ‘a part of’ our world instead of ‘apart from it’ will
be critical to any sustainable future.” (Ibid.) It is important for each of us,
farmers and city dwellers alike, to learn how to “be at home” in the place we
find ourselves, to be content there, but also to understand how and where we fit
in the grand scheme of things, this web of life in which we find ourselves.
