---
title: Our Community is Rich in Cultural Capital
author: S. Roy Kauman
type: post
date: 2013-03-05T00:19:09+00:00
url: /2013/03/our-community-is-rich-in-cultural-capital/
categories:
  - Rural Reconnaissance

---
Rural sociologists define cultural capital in terms of the values and symbols
reflected in the artifacts used by a particular community. (Cornelia Butler
Flora &

Jan L. Flora, Rural Communities: Legacy and Change, Boulder: Westview Press,
25.) Cultural capital is the legacy that enables individuals to “know who they
are” and how to make their way in life. Families and the communities in which
they live pass on to their children the tools they perceive to be needed for
their children’s survival and well-being, whether in the form of land or
education or other resources. For example, my daughter, with an
inter-disciplinary liberal arts degree, began temping for a bank after
graduation and is now a valued client manager, due in part to the work ethic she
inherited from this community through me.

By any measure, this community is rich in cultural capital. I see it in the
artifacts at the Heritage Hall Museum and Archives where I work part-time,
representing almost a century and a half of life since European pioneers first
began settling here. We have been creative in devising ways of making a rich
life on what was once a largely empty prairie. (It is easy to forget that
American Indians have lived here for centuries and have their own rich cultural
capital accrued from living on this land.) This is the legacy, the cultural
capital, we are passing on to our children through our homes, churches and
schools.

A large part of our cultural capital consists of knowing who we are and where we
have come from. This derives in part from the knowledge of our ethnic heritage.
Freeman and the rural community around it were settled mostly by various groups
of Germans from Russia. These were German farmers who had been invited to Russia
by the German Czarina Catherine the Great in the 18th century, and who already
had a long history and experience with creating agrarian communities when they
came to this country in the late 19th century. While an ethnic heritage can
easily become a kind of exclusionary idol that wrongly discriminates against
“outsiders,” it is also an indispensable form of cultural capital that enables
us and succeeding generations make a sustainable rural community in this place.
Heritage Hall Museum and Archives documents and preserves this cultural
heritage, and Freeman celebrates it each spring at Schmeckfest.

It is also possible to squander our cultural capital as a community. Or perhaps
more accurately, it is easy to choose forms of cultural capital from the
dominant culture that destroy a rural community like ours. Recent generations
have chosen to adopt the cultural capital of commodity agriculture from the
dominant culture. Now we find that there isn't enough land and that it’s too
costly to sustain such farms. It has not been uncommon


for me to hear successful farmers discourage their children from staying in the
community with comments like, “There’s no future here for you!” While the
cultural capital reflected in such advice may serve their children well in terms
of individual success, it almost certainly guarantees the continued decline of
rural communities like ours.

We need to choose forms of cultural capital that encourage our children to
remain in this rural community. Using the cultural capital we have inherited
from the history of this rural community, we need to envision ways of living
that can be supported by our specific place. The current generation of farmers,
aging as many of them are, will not be the last, despite the fatalism often
reflected in their comments to their children. We have a much richer cultural
capital from which to draw. There is a future for an agrarian community like
ours!
