---
title: Land Auctions and Our Future
author: S. Roy Kaufman
type: post
date: 2013-03-05T00:38:34+00:00
url: /2013/03/land-auctions-and-our-future/
categories:
  - Rural Reconnaissance

---
It’s alarming for someone like me, who grew up in this community, to see the
disappearance of landmarks familiar from my childhood—groves of trees, fence
lines, farm places, schoolhouses, churches. This trend has accelerated in recent
years as corn prices have risen due to the artificial ethanol bubble with its
demand for corn. Perhaps it could be argued that the landscape looks more like
it did when settlers first arrived here 140 years ago—flat open prairie with
nothing obstructing the view. But I’d prefer to see the countryside populated
with farms and farmers making a living from the land.

One of the practices accelerating the changing landscape in recent years is land
auctions, when land is put up for sale at public auction. This is surely one of
the easiest and cleanest ways to accomplish the transfer of land for those who
have land to sell. Professional auctioneers are engaged to advertise and
accomplish the land sale for a small share in the proceeds, and the highest
bidder walks away with the land.

Nevertheless, this form of land transfer carries with it some consequences,
perhaps unforeseen and unintended by those who have land to sell, for the future
of the rural community. Let’s say someone has a quarter section of land to sell,
mostly prime agricultural land, but with a set of buildings and a farm
residence. What happens when this land is sold at public auction?

Such land is sold to the highest bidder, who in the current market is often an
outside investor, at prices local or beginning farmers cannot afford. Having no
use for the grove of trees and old, useless farm buildings, the investor will
either sell off farm-site acreage as a non-farm rural residence, or more likely
in today’s climate, bulldoze the whole works to increase the cultivated land.
Having made a large investment, the investor will require a rental fee most
local farmers cannot afford, so the land will be rented out to some large,
industrial-sized farm operators from outside the community. These farm operators
have no investment in the local community. They will bring in the agricultural
inputs from wherever they are based and ship the crop out that way as well. Not
only does the community lose a farm place and a farm family that might help fill
our schools and churches; it also loses all the investment that local farmers
give and provide to local businesses and agricultural cooperatives.

That same local landowner, perhaps a farmer past retirement age, could choose
other options for the sale of that quarter section that would serve the
interests of the local community. He might, for instance, sell the bulk of the
tillable land on favorable terms to a neighboring farmer who is getting
established or could use a few extra acres for his operation. Then he could take
out the farm place with a small acreage, perhaps 20 or 30 acres at most, and
advertise this land to new and beginning farm couples who want to do alternative
farming— perhaps a community-supported-agriculture (CSA) operation, or a small
dairy. That way, both established, conventional farmers would improve their
operations, and new, alternative farmers could begin their farming operation.
More families, rather than less, would be residing in the community,
contributing to our churches and schools, and re-investing in the local business
community.

Which future do we want—an endless prairie of corn and soy-bean fields unbroken
by any human habitation, or thriving rural communities populated by a diverse
and vibrant farm population? If you have land to sell, give this some thought
before you just put your land up for public auction.
