---
title: Face-to-face relationships are a rural value
author: S Roy Kaufman
type: post
date: 2013-03-05T00:34:21+00:00
url: /2013/03/face-to-face-relationships-are-a-rural-value/
categories:
  - Rural Reconnaissance

---
{{<img src="loretta-horse.jpg" alt="Lorreta on Horse" 
    caption="Loretta Epp age 2 sitting on a horse" >}}

Many regular readers of this column may know that my wife and companion for the
past 43 years died in October. Loretta was a beautiful and gifted woman of
course (I’m not prejudiced), but what strikes me as I reflect on her life is
what a quintessentially rural person she was.

Loretta was born in southwest Minnesota, the eldest daughter of a farm couple
who courted and married during the height of World War II. She was a year old
when her father returned from service with the army in France, and then he and
Loretta’s mother embarked on a career of farming on a succession of rented
farms. They never owned the farms they worked, and today most of those farms
have been completely erased from the landscape. But they were conscientious
farmers, caring for the land and the buildings owned by their landlords and
working hard to provide for themselves and their growing family of four
children.

For all its hardship in hard work and the lack of an abundance of material
resources, Loretta grew up deeply loved and well-nurtured as a person and in her
Christian faith. She always remembered her childhood and youth on the farm
fondly, surrounded by nature and animals and the love of her family. Upward
mobility was nonetheless evident in Loretta’s family, as in most post-World War
II farm families, as Loretta went off to nurse’s training, eventually completing
her bachelor of science in nursing.

Then, of course, she met me and we married. Our first 2 ½ years of marriage were
spent in a foreign rural culture on the island of Crete, Greece. There we both
learned to appreciate and cherish the rural life of Cretan villages, and there
our first child was born. And when we returned to the U.S., I abandoned dreams
of graduate school and sought a call from a small rural church to be their
pastor, since I had seminary training. Thus began a 38 year pilgrimage in four
rural congregations in three states and one province in Canada that ended just
over two years ago with our retirement here in Freeman.

In each of these rural settings, Loretta adopted the church family as her own
and entered deeply into congregational life as a teacher, musician, mentor to
women, and friend. While she would have made an excellent nurse and while I
encouraged her in that, she chose instead to devote herself to the nurturing of
the family and the life of the community. She (and I) learned to garden and can,
raising and preserving a large share of the food we ate through the years. She
baked bread from the wheat I ground with a small mill. (I can only hope I can
make her bread as well as she did!)

By devoting herself to the welfare of her family and the community in which she
lived, Loretta was only doing what rural people the world over devote themselves
to do. For rural folks, the family and the community—those face-to-face
relationships in which we live close to God’s creation—take priority over
careers and success and all the more well-known and recognized achievements that
are typically sought after and celebrated in our culture. It is what leads me to
say that she was a quintessentially rural person. And this is why rural
communities and the people who live in them and sustain them are so important to
me. This is the setting where people are best nurtured to be whole, well-rounded
people, the kind of people who themselves nurture and sustain the common life of
a community wherever they live.

